# Readings: Event Driven Applications

Below you will find some reading material, code samples, and some additional resources that support today’s topic and the upcoming lecture.

Review the Submission Instructions for guidance on completing and submitting this assignment.

## Reading

[Event Driven Programming - alligator.io - digitalocean.com ](https://alligator.io/nodejs/event-driven-programming/)
[Event Driven Programming - digitalocean.com - real link](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/nodejs-event-driven-programming)

Event-Driven Programming is 
  - a logical pattern that we can choose to confine our programming within to avoid issues of complexity and collision. 

Event-Driven Programming is ubiquitous in other frameworks and software.

For the most recognizable example of Event-Driven Programming is the Web Browser.

Every time you interact with a webpage through it’s user interface, an event is happening. 
 - When you click a button a `click` event is triggered. 
 - When you press a key a `keydown` event is triggered. 
These events have associated functions that, when triggered, are executed to make a change to the user interface in some way.

Event-Driven Programming makes use of the following concepts:

An `Event Handler` is a `callback function` that will be called when an event is triggered.
A `Main Loop` listens for event triggers and calls the associated event handler for that event.

The rest of the reading will fall into one of three sections:

1. EventEmitter
2. Removing Listeners
3. Object Oriented Programming + Event-Driven Programming

### EventEmitter

Node.js natively provides us with a useful module called `EventEmitter` that allows us to get started incorporating Event-Driven Programming in our project right away. 

We access the EventEmitter class through the events module. Once imported we’ll need to create a new object from the class to start using it.

```` javascript
const EventEmitter = require('events').EventEmitter;
const myEventEmitter = new EventEmitter;
````

Now we can get started with Event-Driven Programming in Node.

Imagine we’re creating a chat room. We want to alert everyone when a new user joins the chat room. We’ll need an event listener for a userJoined event. First, we’ll write a function that will act as our event listener, then we can use EventEmitters on method to set the listener.

```` javascript 
const EventEmitter = require('events').EventEmitter;
const chatRoomEvents = new EventEmitter;

function userJoined(username){
  // Assuming we already have a function to alert all users.
  alertAllUsers('User ' + username + ' has joined the chat.');
}

// Run the userJoined function when a 'userJoined' event is triggered.
chatRoomEvents.on('userJoined', userJoined);
````
The next step would be to make sure that our chat room triggers a userJoined event whenever someone logs in so that our event handler is called. EventEmitter has an emit method that we we use to trigger the event. We would want to trigger this event from within a login function inside of our chatroom module.

```` javascript
function login(username){
  chatRoomEvents.emit('userJoined', username);
}
````
We could expand further by creating events for when a user logs out, when a message is sent, when a message is received, or any other event we could possibly need for our chat room to be as dynamic as we want it.

### Removing Listeners

There will likely come a time when you want to remove an event listener from an event. This could be for performance reasons (the event is no longer needed) or to avoid memory leaks (if an event listener references an object that is no longer needed, it won’t be able to be garbage-collected. This can lead to a build up of unnecessary objects).

To remove event listeners in EventEmitter we can use the removeListener or removeAllListeners method. It’s important to note that in the EventEmitter that comes built-in with Node you must pass a reference to the exact function you wish to remove when using the removeListener method. This means wherever you wish to remove the event, you’ll need to make sure the function is able to be referenced from that place in your code. For this reason it is often best to name your event handling functions and declaring them before you register the event listener, as opposed to leaving them anonymous.


### Object Oriented Programming + Event-Driven Programming

The last thing I want to touch on here is the combination of the Object Oriented and Event-driven programming paradigms. These two make for a very valuable combination in a wide variety of situations and I think it can be beneficial to understand and conceptualize why.

The Object Oriented approach promotes the idea that all behavior of an individual unit (or object) be handled from code within that unit. Using this approach, applications are built with many different units that all speak to and interact with each other.

Imagine we’re building a mail application. We might have an object whose sole purpose is to process the incoming and outgoing mail messages for our client. This object would contain all of its own behavioral functions. We might have a sendMail function that delivers our mail to a server. We might also have a receiveMail function that tells the server to deliver us any new mail it has for us. We’ll call the object responsible for these server interactions our Mailbox.

## Node docs on events

[Node docs: events - nodejs.org](https://nodejs.org/api/events.html)

Much of the Node.js core API is built around an idiomatic asynchronous event-driven architecture in which certain kinds of objects (called "emitters") emit named events that cause Function objects ("listeners") to be called.

For instance: a net.Server object emits an event each time a peer connects to it; a fs.ReadStream emits an event when the file is opened; a stream emits an event whenever data is available to be read.

All objects that emit events are instances of the EventEmitter class. These objects expose an eventEmitter.on() function that allows one or more functions to be attached to named events emitted by the object. Typically, event names are camel-cased strings but any valid JavaScript property key can be used.

When the EventEmitter object emits an event, all of the functions attached to that specific event are called synchronously. Any values returned by the called listeners are ignored and discarded.

The following example shows a simple EventEmitter instance with a single listener. The eventEmitter.on() method is used to register listeners, while the eventEmitter.emit() method is used to trigger the event.

````javascript
const EventEmitter = require('events');

class MyEmitter extends EventEmitter {}

const myEmitter = new MyEmitter();
myEmitter.on('event', () => {
  console.log('an event occurred!');
});
myEmitter.emit('event');
````

### Passing arguments and `this` to listeners

The eventEmitter.emit() method allows an arbitrary set of arguments to be passed to the listener functions. Keep in mind that when an ordinary listener function is called, the standard this keyword is intentionally set to reference the EventEmitter instance to which the listener is attached.

```javascript
const myEmitter = new MyEmitter();
myEmitter.on('event', function(a, b) {
  console.log(a, b, this, this === myEmitter);
  // Prints:
  //   a b MyEmitter {
  //     domain: null,
  //     _events: { event: [Function] },
  //     _eventsCount: 1,
  //     _maxListeners: undefined } true
});
myEmitter.emit('event', 'a', 'b');

```

It is possible to use ES6 Arrow Functions as listeners, however, when doing so, the this keyword will no longer reference the EventEmitter instance:

```javascript
const myEmitter = new MyEmitter();
myEmitter.on('event', (a, b) => {
  console.log(a, b, this);
  // Prints: a b {}
});
myEmitter.emit('event', 'a', 'b');
```

### Asynchronous vs. synchronous

The EventEmitter calls all listeners synchronously in the order in which they were registered. This ensures the proper sequencing of events and helps avoid race conditions and logic errors. When appropriate, listener functions can switch to an asynchronous mode of operation using the setImmediate() or process.nextTick() methods:

```javascript
const myEmitter = new MyEmitter();
myEmitter.on('event', (a, b) => {
  setImmediate(() => {
    console.log('this happens asynchronously');
  });
});
myEmitter.emit('event', 'a', 'b');
```

### Handling events only once

When a listener is registered using the eventEmitter.on() method, that listener is invoked every time the named event is emitted.

```javascript
const myEmitter = new MyEmitter();
let m = 0;
myEmitter.on('event', () => {
  console.log(++m);
});
myEmitter.emit('event');
// Prints: 1
myEmitter.emit('event');
// Prints: 2
```

Using the eventEmitter.once() method, it is possible to register a listener that is called at most once for a particular event. Once the event is emitted, the listener is unregistered and then called.
```javascript
const myEmitter = new MyEmitter();
let m = 0;
myEmitter.once('event', () => {
  console.log(++m);
});
myEmitter.emit('event');
// Prints: 1
myEmitter.emit('event');
// Ignored
```

### Error events

When an error occurs within an EventEmitter instance, the typical action is for an 'error' event to be emitted. These are treated as special cases within Node.js.

If an EventEmitter does not have at least one listener registered for the 'error' event, and an 'error' event is emitted, the error is thrown, a stack trace is printed, and the Node.js process exits.

```javascript
const myEmitter = new MyEmitter();
myEmitter.emit('error', new Error('whoops!'));
// Throws and crashes Node.js
```

## Assignment Instructions

- Read for understanding the assigned resources for this class and watch any assigned videos.
- Skim and bookmark the additional resources provided.
- Add a new page in your reading notes repository, and add your notes.
- Add a link to this new page under the Table of Contents for this course.
- Begin with a statement addressing why this topic matters as it relates to what you are studying in this module.
- Answer each and every question or prompt presented in the assignment above.
- If there are no questions provided, summarize and explain this topic via an analogy from your previous work or home experience.
- Make a section in your notes titled ## Things I want to know more about, and anytime a question arises in your mind, or something catches your curiosity, note it under this heading.
- If you utilize any content directly from the reading sources, be sure to identify what you are quoting, and cite the source.

### To submit this assignment
- Publish your updates.
- Copy the rendered content, and paste it into the discussion.


## Things I want to know more about

more examples of event driven programming